# Monte Carlo Simulator

The _Monte Carlo Simulator_, `MCS` in short, is a simulation package
for high-energy physics. It uses Monte Carlo techniques for the
randomised simulation of particle interactions. The system borrows
concepts defined in the Geant4 system; however, they have been
reimplemented in ISO C99 using new data structures and algorithms with
the aim that the system will be ported eventually to multi-core CPUs
and GPGPUs.

_The project is currently on hold. See history for details._


## Compilation

`MCS` is written in
[CWEB](http://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~uno/cweb.html), and
requires a [C compiler](http://gcc.gnu.org/) for compilation.

### Compilation of source

Please note that `cuda.w` requires Nvidia CUDA SDK for
compilation.

Here are the steps for compilation:

1. Run `ctangle` to generate `mcs.c`.

    $ make mcs.c

2. Create build directory, and copy source code.

    $ mkdir build
    $ cp mcs.c build/

3. Generate Cmake files, build application and test

    $ cd build
    $ cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" ..
    $ make
    $ ./mcs


### Generate documentation

To generate the source code documentation, do the following:

1. Generate the figures using [Metapost](http://ctan.org/pkg/metapost)

    $ cd figures
    $ ./genfigs.sh


2. Generate the documentation

    $ make mcs.pdf


## History

The _Monte Carlo Simulator_ project began in June 2011, when I was
a WIMCS Research Fellow under Prof.~David W. Walker at Cardiff
University. This project was conceived as a study on the
parallelisation of Monte Carlo particle simulations that would find
eventual use in radiotherapy treatment planning. The initial aim of
the project was to port the Geant4 system to run on Nvidia Tesla
GPUs. However, after studying the Geant4 code-base, by the end of July
2011 it became clear that it will be prohibitive to port the entire
Geant4 system given the short duration of the funding left (6 months,
from August 2011 until January 2012) and that only I would be
carrying out the design and implementation. We therefore decided to
use the Geant4 system only as a guideline system architecture, and to
reimplement the performance-intensive concepts and their dependencies
for a simplified simulator. This implementation, which began on 5
August 2011, uses data structures and algorithms that are designed
for multithreaded parallelisation on multicore GPUs and CPUs.

After my funding expired, I had to stop working on this
project. However, I hope that I will be able to work on this project 
again at some point in the future.


## Introduction

The `MCS` system is in effect an event processor. The user specifies
the number of events they wish to simulate, and provides the system
with the necessary details to process each of the events. These
details include procedures and data for generating the particles for
each event, and the _physics processes_ required by the type of the
particle being simulated and the properties of the materials involved
in each of the interactions. We are only interested in interactions
that are happening inside a closed three-dimensional system, referred
to as the _world_. Since the world is defined by the components
present, the user must provide the geometry of the components in
addition to the properties of the materials the components are made
of. In this document, these input data will be referred to _simulation
parameters_.

Once the `MCS` system is supplied with a valid set of simulation
parameters, it processes the geometries and creates a data structure
that allows efficient location of an interaction point. This is an
important step because, to process a large number of interactions
rapidly, we must efficiently find the location inside the world where
the interactions are happening, as it determines the materials
required by the processes.

We then define the _particle gun_, which generates the required number
of _primary particles_ for each of the events. Primary particles are
particles that are generated explicitly by a particle gun, and
_secondary particles_ are those that are generated as a result of
particle-matter interaction. Since multiple primary particles may be
generated by an event, a _vertex_ is defined for each event. For any
given event the associated vertex provides the location of the
particle gun, so that all of the particles generated originates from
this location. When the particle gun is activated, a set of primary
particles are generated. These particles have the same origin, as
defined by the vertex location, however, they carry different
properties, such as energy, momentum, etc. These values are set using
a _random number generator_.

Once a particle has been generated, it travels through the materials
until it either comes to a stop, or exits the closed three-dimensional
world. Throughout this journey, the _trajectory_ of the particle
changes depending on its interaction with the materials. Hence, the
`MCS` system uses a _tracker_ to track each of the particles
throughout its journey. A snapshot of the particle in its trajectory
is referred to as a _track_, and is processed independently of any
previous tracks. In other words, a track does not remember its
past. Hence, to keep a record of the trajectory, the tracker records
old tracks as new ones are derived. Each of these points on the
trajectory is referred to as the _step point_, and the process of
moving to the next step point as _stepping_. Hence, we invoke
multiple stepping commands to chart the entire trajectory of a
particle.

To move a particle from one track to the next, each stepping decides
the length with which the particle must progress. This is referred to
as a _step_. Each step has a start point and an end point. These
points store information for retrieving the material properties that
are required by each of the physics processes that are valid in that
stepping. The length of a step is determined by the process which
requires the shortest space-time _interaction length_. In other words,
the next track must be located in space-time so that all of the valid
physics processes are applicable.

We use a _stack_ to store all of the unprocessed particles, both
primary and secondary. At the beginning of each event, each of the
primary particles generated by the particle gun are first converted to
a track, so that the tracker can process them. Then, the tracks are
all pushed into the _track stack_. This stack is then passed to the
tracker, which continuously pops a track from the track stack and
charts the particle's trajectory. If secondary particles are generated
as a result of an interaction, these are first converted to a track,
and then pushed into the track stack. In other words, if we consider
the entire simulation as a tree, where the root of the tree represents
the particle gun, the nodes represent the particle-matter
interactions, and the leaves represent interactions which resulted in
the particle to either stop, or exit the closed three-dimensional
world, then the tracker is simply undergoing a _depth-first tree
traversal_.


